Annapolis teen stranded for more than nine hours on capsized boat
Sunday, April 8, 2012 17:29:14 GMT-05:00
The way 18-year-old Thomas Lundvall told it to investigators, he had spent Saturday fixing up a sailboat with his dad. About midnight, he got the urge to test it out.
But when Lundvall took the 16-foot 1988 daysailer to the mouth of the Severn River, a strong gust caused it to capsize in the cold water, authorities said. The Annapolis teenager would spend the next nine hours aboard the overturned boat until a navigator on a passing freighter spotted him waving and yelling for help in the early morning light, authorities said.
“If it wasn’t for the person on board the freighter being vigilant and seeing the individual, we could be looking at our first fatality of the year,” said Sgt. Art Windemuth, a spokesman for the Maryland Natural Resources Police.
After a harrowing experience, authorities said, the ending will be a happy one for Lundvall. Lt. j.g. Salomee Fisher of the Coast Guard said that rescuers pulled the teen from atop his boat and that he is “expected to recuperate.”
“We’re happy to have a good ending to this Easter morning ordeal,” Fisher said, “and happy to have a mariner safe at home with his family today.”
The outcome had been far from certain.
By the time emergency responders from the Coast Guard, Anne Arundel County Fire Department and Natural Resources Police were alerted to Lundvall’s plight about 8:30 a.m., he had been stranded since about midnight, authorities said. Data from Wundergound.com show that temperatures dropped to about 44 degrees in the early morning hours Sunday, and Windemuth said the water temperature was in the low 50s.
Lundvall could barely communicate with the rescuers who reached him shortly after 9 a.m., and his core body temperature had dropped to 87 degrees, authorities said. He was flown to a hospital for treatment of hypothermia, authorities said.
Windemuth said the teen told investigators that a gust capsized the boat about a mile north of the Annapolis anchorage. Lundvall had not told anyone where he was going, and authorities said the teen’s father was unaware that he had taken the boat out.
Investigators are looking into whether alcohol played a role in the incident, Windemuth said.
A relative of Lundvall’s declined to comment on Sunday.
Windemuth said that Maryland had an unusually high 25 boating deaths last year, up from an annual average of 12. He added that although there have been no fatalities in the state so far this year, incidents such as Lundvall’s should remind mariners about the need to tell others where they are going and carry communication equipment.
Dec. 19: Two die, one missing in boat accidents
April 22, 2011: Fishing boat capsizes on Chesapeake, killing two
