How innovation has changed the job of an auto repair technician
Sunday, May 26, 2013 14:32:00 GMT-05:00
On a warm morning in May, a group of students is huddled around a white Chrysler Cirrus parked outside the garage at the Excel Institute, a Northeast Washington job training facility that prepares participants for careers in auto repair.
Their teacher is toting a $6,000 portable computer, and he’s got it plugged into the vehicle, which has been unexpectedly shutting down. Using data that the portable computer has collected from the master computer inside the car, the group is getting closer to zeroing in on the problem. The fuel pressure is good. It has 14.7 parts of air to every one part fuel, the correct amount.
By process of elimination, they determine that the ignition system isn’t generating a spark. The computer helps them figure out exactly why. (Corrosion inside the distributor, it turns out, is the culprit.)
 “Instead of taking eight hours to diagnose a car, you can do it in 30 minutes,” said Eddie Cathey, an instructor at Excel.
Innovations in the automotive industry have gradually transformed what it means to be an auto repair worker. As the cars on our streets have become more computerized, so, too, has the job of maintaining and fixing these vehicles. And so a trade that was once largely mechanical is today primarily technical, and therefore requires workers to be skilled computer users, strong readers and able mathematicians.
For someone in the Washington area with only a high school education, it’s a job that might offer a stronger shot than most at climbing the economic ladder.
In this region, Labor Department data show that the mean annual wage for auto repair technicians was $47,710 in 2012, a figure that compares favorably to mean wages for many other jobs that do not require a college education. For example, the mean wage for food service jobs in the Washington area was $24,260; for hotel clerks, $25,750.
The mean wage for auto repair technicians here also exceeds the nationwide mean for these workers of $39,060.
In addition to offering the prospect of higher income, experts and employers say that demand for workers in this trade is surging as aging baby boomers retire and too few diagnosticians have entered the trade to replace them.
It’s not just computer-savvy diagnosticians that are in short supply. Experts say more workers are needed who can do simple maintenance work such as brake pad replacements or oil changes. As cars are built better, they are less likely to break down, and more likely to need routine upkeep.
For students at Excel and others like them, auto repair training could be a gateway to a higher standard of living and greater employment stability.
**
Antwane Peoples enrolled at Excel after more than seven years of service in the Navy and a stint working as a government contractor in records management and document imaging jobs. As a father of five children, he had become weary of the uncertainty surrounding the federal budget and how it might affect his job.
“Doing the contracting work, every October 1, I was always looking over my back,” Peoples said. “Trying to support a family, it gets a little hectic.”
And so he decided it was time for a career change.
The auto repair trade, Peoples said, “just seems like more stability.”
Peoples is poised to graduate from Excel in 2014. When he completes his training, he plans to take a test that would certify him to service automotive electrical systems. With hybrid vehicles gaining popularity, he expects such skills will be in high demand.
The Excel Institute, founded in 1998, prepares students to earn a variety of Automotive Service Excellence certifications, which are the industry standard for verifying one’s expertise.
